---
marp: true
theme: default
paginate: true
size: 16:9
#footer: https://github.com/jbcoe/cc-protocol
---

# Structural Subtyping for C++

## [P4148R0](https://wg21.link/P4148R0)

### 11 May 2026

---

# Introduction

We propose adding two new class templates to the C++ Standard Library to support structural sub-typing at runtime:

```c++
template <typename T, typename Allocator = std::allocator<T>>
class protocol;
```

```c++
template <typename T>
class protocol_view;
```

---

# Polymorphism

polymorphism (from the Greek for "many forms") is the ability of different objects to respond to the same function call in their own specific ways.

C++ achieves polymorphism through mechanisms: Compile-time and Runtime.

---

# Compile-time Polymorphism

Overloaded functions or function templates allow the compiler to detemrine which function to call during the build process:

```c++
double func(const A& a);
double func(const B& b);
double func(const C& c);
```

```c++
<template typename T>
double func(const T& t);
```

---

# Runtime Polymorphism

Inheritance-based polymorphism enables runtime dispatch by using base-class interfaces to invoke overridden virtual functions across an extensible, open set of derived types.

```c++
struct Shape {
    virtual size_t sides() const = 0;
    virtual ~Shape() = default;
};

class Triangle : public Shape {
public:
    size_t sides() const override { return 3; }
};

class Square : public Shape {
public:
    size_t sides() const override { return 4; }
};
```

---

# Closed set Runtime Polymorphism

In C++ we can use `std::variant` and `std::visit` to implement closed-set polymorphism: runtime dispatch over a predefined set of types.

```c++
template<class... Ts> struct overload : Ts... { using Ts::operator()...; };

...

std::variant<int, std::string> myData = "Polymorphic String";

std::visit(overload {
    [](int val) {
        std::cout << "Processing int: " << val * 2 << "\n";
    },
    [](const std::string& val) {
        std::cout << "Processing string: " << val << " (length: " << val.size() << ")\n";
    }
}, myData);
```

---

# Type erasure

Type erasure enables runtime polymorphism for an open set of unrelated types.

```c++
class AnyDrawable {
    struct Interface {
        virtual ~Interface() = default;
        virtual void draw() = 0;
    };

    template<typename T> struct Model : Interface {
        T d; Model(T t) : d(t) {}
        void draw() override { d.draw(); }
    };

    Interface* i_;

    void draw() { i_->draw(); }
};
```

---

# `polymorphic (C++26)`

C++ 26 introduces `polymorphic<T, A>`, a value-type which owns an object of a class derived from `T`.

As it is an owning type, `polymorphic` takes a second template argument for the allocator.  If no allocator is specified, the default allocator will be used.

`polymorphic` is a value-type: only const qualified methods of the owned object can be accessed from a const-access path; copies have their own distinct, non-sliced, copies of the owned object.

`polymorphic` provides `operator->` and `operator*` to access the owned object.

---

# `protocol (Proposed addition)`

The class template `protocol<T, A>` owns an object whose interface structurally subtypes the interface of the first template argument `T`.

As it is an owning type, `protocol` takes a second template argument for the allocator.  If no allocator is specified, the default allocator will be used.

`protocol` is a value-type: only const qualified methods of the owned object can be accessed from a const-access path; copies have their own distinct, non-sliced, copies of the owned object.

`protocol<T>` has all of the member functions of `T` and forwards them to the owned object.

---

# `protocol_view (Proposed addition)`

The class template `protocol_view<T>` is a non-owning view on an object whose interface structurally subtypes the interface of the template argument `T`.

`protocol_view` can be cheaply copied and passed by value.

`protocol<T>` has all of the member functions of `T` and forwards them to the viewed object.

`protocol_view<const T>` can be used for const-only access to an object in a similar manner to `std::span`.

---

# Function-like objects

C++ has a plethora of function-like type-erasing class templates.

- `std::function` (C++11)
- `std::function_ref` (C++26)
- `std::move_only_function` (C++23)
- `std::copyable_function` (C++26)

Each of these can be implemented using `protocol<T>` or `protocol_view<T>` by defining a suitable `T`.

---

# Overload sets

`protocol` and `protocol_view` can be used to implement an overload set that can be used as a class member or passed as a function argument.

```c++
struct OverloadedFunction {
    R1 operator()(Args1&&... args) const;
    R2 operator()(Args2&&... args);
    R3 operator()(Args3&&... args);
};
```

---

# Indexed containers

`protocol` and `protocol_view` can be used for indexed container access.

```c++
struct IndexedContainer<T> {
    const T& operator[](size_t i) const;
    T& operator[](size_t i);
    size_t size() const;
};
```

---

# Implementation

A reference implementation, using an AST-based Python code generator to simulate
post-C++26 code injection, is available at <https://github.com/jbcoe/cc-protocol>.

There is an open PR to illustrate the work (currently) needed to add new types
<https://github.com/jbcoe/cc-protocol/pull/53>

---

# Future work

Future extensions to C++ reflection should allow `protocol` and `protocol_view` to be  implemented without the need for a custom build step.
